# Notes for today

## Shaders

As mentioned in the Hello Triangle chapter, shaders are little programs that
rest on the GPU. These programs are run for each specific section of the
graphics pipeline. In a basic sense, shaders are nothing more than programs
transforming inputs to outputs. Shaders are also very isolated programs in that
they're not allowed to communicate with each other; the only communication they
have is via their inputs and outputs.

In the previous chapter we briefly touched the surface of shaders and how to
properly use them. We will now explain shaders, and specifically the OpenGL
Shading Language, in a more general fashion.

## GLSL

Shaders are written in the C-like language GLSL. GLSL is tailored for use with
graphics and contains useful features specifically targeted at vector and
matrix manipulation.

Shaders always begin with a version declaration, followed by a list of input
and output variables, uniforms and its main function. Each shader's entry point
is at its main function where we process any input variables and output the
results in its output variables. Don't worry if you don't know what uniforms
are, we'll get to those shortly.

```glsl

#vesion version_number
in type in_variable_name_1;
in type in_variable_name_2;
out type out_variable_name;
uniform type uniform_name;

void main() {
    // process input(s) and do some weird graphics stuff
    // output processed stuff to the output variable
    out_variable_name = weird_stuff();
}
```

## Types

GLSL has, like any other programming language, data types for specifying what
kind of variable we want to work with. GLSL has most of the default basic types
we know from languages like C: int , float , double , uint and bool . GLSL also
features two container types that we'll be using a lot, namely vectors and
matrices . We'll discuss matrices in a later chapter.

### Vectors
vector in GLSL is a 2,3 or 4 component container for any of the basic
types just mentioned. They can take the following form (n represents
the number of components):

* vecn : the default vector of n floats.
* bvecn : a vector of n booleans.
* ivecn : a vector of n integers.
* uvecn : a vector of n unsigned integers.
* dvecn : a vector of n double components.

Components of a vector can be accessed via vec.x where x is the first component
of the vector. You can use .x , .y , .z and .w to access their first, second,
third and fourth component respectively. GLSL also allows you to use rgba for
colors or stpq for texture coordinates, accessing the same components.

### Swizzling

```glsl
vec2 someVec;
vec4 differentVec = someVec.xyxx;
vec3 anotherVec = differentVec.zyw;
vec4 otherVec = someVec.xxxx + anotherVec.yxzy;
vec2 vect = vec2(0.5, 0.7);
vec4 result = vec4(vect, 0.0, 0.0);
vec4 otherResult = vec4(result.xyz, 1.0);
```

## Ins and Outs

Shaders are nice little programs on their own, but they are part of a whole and
for that reason we want to have inputs and outputs on the individual shaders so
that we can move stuff around. GLSL defined the in and out keywords
specifically for that purpose. Each shader can specify inputs and outputs using
those keywords and wherever an output variable matches with an input variable
of the next shader stage they're passed along. The vertex and fragment shader
differ a bit though.

The vertex shader should receive some form of input otherwise it would be
pretty ineffective. The vertex shader differs in its input, in that it receives
its input straight from the vertex data. To define how the vertex data is
organized we specify the input variables with location metadata so we can
configure the vertex attributes on the CPU. We've seen this in the previous
chapter as layout (location = 0) . The vertex shader thus requires an extra
layout specification for its inputs so we can link it with the vertex data.

It is also possible to omit the layout (location = 0) specifier and query for
the attribute locations in your OpenGL code via glGetAttribLocation, but author
prefers to set them in the vertex shader. It is easier to understand and saves
you (and OpenGL) some work.


## Uniforms

Uniforms are another way to pass data from our application on the CPU to the
shaders on the GPU. Uniforms are however slightly different compared to vertex
attributes. First of all, uniforms are global . Global, meaning that a uniform
variable is unique per shader program object, and can be accessed from any
shader at any stage in the shader program. Second, whatever you set the uniform
value to, uniforms will keep their values until they're either reset or
updated.

To declare a uniform in GLSL we simply add the uniform keyword to a shader with
a type and a name. From that point on we can use the newly declared uniform in
the shader. Let's see if this time we can set the color of the triangle via a
uniform

We declared a uniform vec4 ourColor in the fragment shader and set the
fragment's output color to the content of this uniform value. Since uniforms
are global variables, we can define them in any shader stage we'd like so no
need to go through the vertex shader again to get something to the fragment
shader. We're not using this uniform in the vertex shader so there's no need to
define it there.

### WARN

If you declare a uniform that isn't used anywhere in your GLSL code the
compiler will silently remove the variable from the compiled version which is
the cause for several frustrating errors; keep this in mind!

## Passing values to the uniform shader inputs

The uniform is currently empty; we haven't added any data to the uniform yet so
let's try that. We first need to find the index/location of the uniform
attribute in our shader. Once we have the index/location of the uniform, we can
update its values. Instead of passing a single color to the fragment shader,
let's spice things up by gradually changing color over time:

```cpp
float timeValue{glfwGetTime()};
float greenValue{sin(timeValue) / 2.0F + 0.5F};
int vertexColorLocation{glGetUniformLocation(shaderProgram, "ourColor")};

if (vertexColorLocationer == -1) {
    std::cout << "ERROR" << '\n';
    return 0;
}

// Must use the shader before updating any uniform values in the pipeline
glUseProgram(shaderProgram);
glUniform4f(vertexColorLocation, 0.0f, greenValue, 0.0f, 1.0f);


```

Because OpenGL is in its core a C library it does not have native support for
function overloading, so wherever a function can be called with different types
OpenGL defines new functions for each type required; glUniform is a perfect
example of this. The function requires a specific postfix for the type of the
uniform you want to set. A few of the possible postfixes are:

* f : the function expects a float as its value.
* i : the function expects an int as its value.
* ui : the function expects an unsigned int as its value.
* 3f : the function expects 3 float s as its value.
* fv : the function expects a float vector/array as its value.

Whenever you want to configure an option of OpenGL simply pick the overloaded
function that corresponds with your type. In our case we want to set 4 floats
of the uniform individually so we pass our data via glUniform4f (note that we
also could've used the fv version).

## More attributes

We saw in the previous chapter how we can fill a VBO, configure vertex
attribute pointers and store it all in a VAO. This time, we also want
to add color data to the vertex data. We're going to add color data as
3 float s to the vertices array. We assign a red, green and blue color
to each of the corners of our triangle respectively:

```cpp
float vertices[] = {
    // positions         // colors
     0.5f, -0.5f, 0.0f,  1.0f, 0.0f, 0.0f,   // bottom right
    -0.5f, -0.5f, 0.0f,  0.0f, 1.0f, 0.0f,   // bottom left
     0.0f,  0.5f, 0.0f,  0.0f, 0.0f, 1.0f    // top 
};
```

Since we now have more data to send to the vertex shader, it is necessary to
adjust the vertex shader to also receive our color value as a vertex attribute
input. Note that we set the location of the aColor attribute to 1 with the
layout specifier:


```glsl
#version 330 core
layout (location = 0) in vec3 aPos;   // the position variable has attribute position 0
layout (location = 1) in vec3 aColor; // the color variable has attribute position 1

out vec3 ourColor; // output a color to the fragment shader

void main() {
    gl_Position = vec4(aPos, 1.0);
    ourColor = aColor; // set ourColor to the input color we got from the vertex data
}
```

Since we no longer use a uniform for the fragment's color, but now use the
ourColor output variable we'll have to change the fragment shader as well:

```glsl
#version 330 core
out vec4 FragColor;
in vec3 ourColor;

void main() {
    FragColor = vec4(ourColor, 1.0);
}

```

Because we added another vertex attribute and updated the VBO's memory we have
to re-configure the vertex attribute pointers

Knowing the current layout we can update the vertex format with
glVertexAttribPointer :

```cpp
// position attribute
glVertexAttribPointer(0, 3, GL_FLOAT, GL_FALSE, 6 * sizeof(float), (void*)0);
glEnableVertexAttribArray(0);
// color attribute
glVertexAttribPointer(1, 3, GL_FLOAT, GL_FALSE, 6 * sizeof(float), (void*)(3* sizeof(float)));
glEnableVertexAttribArray(1);
```

The first few arguments of glVertexAttribPointer are relatively
straightforward. This time we are configuring the vertex attribute on attribute
location 1 . The color values have a size of 3 float s and we do not normalize
the values.

_Since we now have two vertex attributes we have to re-calculate the stride
value. To get the next attribute value (e.g. the next x component of the
position vector) in the data array we have to move 6 float s to the right,
three for the position values and three for the color values. This gives us a
stride value of 6 times the size of a float in bytes (= 24 bytes). Also, this
time we have to specify an offset. For each vertex, the position vertex
attribute is first so we declare an offset of 0 . The color attribute starts
after the position data so the offset is 3 * sizeof(float) in bytes (= 12
bytes)_

### What just happend?

The image may not be exactly what you would expect, since we only
supplied 3 colors, not the huge color palette we're seeing right now.
This is all the result of something called fragment interpolation in
the fragment shader. When rendering a triangle the rasterization
stage usually results in a lot more fragments than vertices
originally specified. The rasterizer then determines the positions of
each of those fragments based on where they reside on the triangle
shape.

Based on these positions, it interpolates all the fragment shader's
input variables. Say for example we have a line where the upper point
has a green color and the lower point a blue color. If the fragment
shader is run at a fragment that resides around a position at 70% of
the line, its resulting color input attribute would then be a linear
combination of green and blue; to be more precise: 30% blue and 70%
green.

This is exactly what happened at the triangle. We have 3 vertices and thus 3
colors, and judging from the triangle's pixels it probably contains around
50000 fragments, where the fragment shader interpolated the colors among those
pixels. If you take a good look at the colors you'll see it all makes sense:
red to blue first gets to purple and then to blue. Fragment interpolation is
applied to all the fragment shader's input attributes.
