# Hello-Triangle

* The first part of the pipeline is the vertex shader that takes as input a
single vertex. The main purpose of the vertex shader is to transform 3D
coordinates into different 3D coordinates (more on that later) and the vertex
shader allows us to do some basic processing on the vertex attributes.

* The output of the vertex shader stage is optionally passed to the geometry
shader . The geometry shader takes as input a collection of vertices that form
a primitive and has the ability to generate other shapes by emitting new
vertices to form new (or other) primitive(s). In this example case, it
generates a second triangle out of the given shape.

* The primitive assembly stage takes as input all the vertices (or vertex if
GL_POINTS is chosen) from the vertex (or geometry) shader that form one or more
primitives and assembles all the point(s) in the primitive shape given; in this
case two triangles.

* The output of the primitive assembly stage is then passed on to the
rasterization stage where it maps the resulting primitive(s) to the
corresponding pixels on the final screen, resulting in fragments for the
fragment shader to use. Before the fragment shaders run, clipping is performed.
Clipping discards all fragments that are outside your view, increasing
performance.

* In modern OpenGL we are required to define at least a vertex and fragment
shader of our own (there are no default vertex/fragment shaders on the GPU).
For this reason it is often quite difficult to start learning modern OpenGL
since a great deal of knowledge is required before being able to render your
first triangle. Once you do get to finally render your triangle at the end of
this chapter you will end up knowing a lot more about graphics programming.

* Unlike usual screen coordinates the positive y-axis points in the
up-direction and the (0,0) coordinates are at the center of the graph, instead
of top-left. Eventually you want all the (transformed) coordinates to end up in
this coordinate space, otherwise they won't be visible. Your NDC coordinates
will then be transformed to screen-space coordinates via the viewport transform
using the data you provided with glViewport . The resulting screen-space
coordinates are then transformed to fragments as inputs to your fragment
shader.

* With the vertex data defined we'd like to send it as input to the first
process of the graphics pipeline: the vertex shader. This is done by creating
memory on the GPU where we store the vertex data, configure how OpenGL should
interpret the memory and specify how to send the data to the graphics card. The
vertex shader then processes as much vertices as we tell it to from its memory.

* We manage this memory via so called vertex buffer objects ( VBO ) that can
store a large number of vertices in the GPU's memory. The advantage of using
those buffer objects is that we can send large batches of data all at once to
the graphics card, and keep it there if there's enough memory left, without
having to send data one vertex at a time. Sending data to the graphics card
from the CPU is relatively slow, so wherever we can we try to send as much data
as possible at once. Once the data is in the graphics card's memory the vertex
shader has almost instant access to the vertices making it extremely fast

* A vertex buffer object is our first occurrence of an OpenGL object as we've
discussed in the OpenGL chapter. Just like any object in OpenGL, this buffer
has a unique ID corresponding to that buffer, so we can generate one with a
buffer ID using the glGenBuffers function:

```cpp
unsigned int VBO{};
glGenBuffers(1, &VBO);
```

* OpenGL has many types of buffer objects and the buffer type of a
vertex buffer object is GL_ARRAY_BUFFER . OpenGL allows us to bind to
several buffers at once as long as they have a different buffer type.
We can bind the newly created buffer to the GL_ARRAY_BUFFER target
with the glBindBuffer function:

```cpp
glBindBuffer(GL_ARRAY_BUFFER, VBO);
```

* From that point on any buffer calls we make (on the GL_ARRAY_BUFFER target)
will be used to configure the currently bound buffer, which is VBO . Then we
can make a call to the glBufferData function that copies the previously defined
vertex data into the buffer's memory:

```cpp
glBufferData(GL_ARRAY_BUFFER, sizeof(vertices), vertices, GL_STATIC_DRAW);
```

* glBufferData is a function specifically targeted to copy user-defined data
into the currently bound buffer. Its first argument is the type of the buffer
we want to copy data into: the vertex buffer object currently bound to the
GL_ARRAY_BUFFER target. The second argument specifies the size of the data (in
bytes) we want to pass to the buffer; a simple sizeof of the vertex data
suffices. The third parameter is the actual data we want to send.

The fourth parameter specifies how we want the graphics card to manage the
given data. This can take 3 forms:

 - GL_STREAM_DRAW : the data is set only once and used by the GPU at most a few
 times.
 - GL_STATIC_DRAW : the data is set only once and used many times.
 - GL_DYNAMIC_DRAW : the data is changed a lot and used many times.

* The position data of the triangle does not change, is used a lot, and stays
the same for every render call so its usage type should best be GL_STATIC_DRAW
. If, for instance, one would have a buffer with data that is likely to change
frequently, a usage type of GL_DYNAMIC_DRAW ensures the graphics card will
place the data in memory that allows for faster writes.

## Vertex shader

* Modern OpenGL requires that we at least set up a vertex and fragment shader
* The first thing we need to do is write the vertex shader in the shader
language GLSL (OpenGL Shading Language) and then compile this shader so we can
use it in our application. Below you'll find the source code of a very basic
vertex shader in GLSL:

```glsl
#version 330 core
layout (location = 0) in vec3 aPos;

void main() {
    gl_Position = vec4(aPos.x, aPos.y, aPos.z, 1.0f);
}

```

* The current vertex shader is probably the most simple vertex shader
we can imagine because we did no processing whatsoever on the input
data and simply forwarded it to the shader's output. In real
applications the input data is usually not already in normalized
device coordinates so we first have to transform the input data to
coordinates that fall within OpenGL's visible region.

## Compiling a shader

* In order for OpenGL to use the shader it has to dynamically compile it at
run-time from its source code. The first thing we need to do is create a shader
object, again referenced by an ID. So we store the vertex shader as an unsigned
int and create the shader with glCreateShader:

```cpp
unsigned int vertexShader;
vertexShader = glCreateShader(GL_VERTEX_SHADER);
```

* We provide the type of shader we want to create as an argument to
glCreateShader . Since we're creating a vertex shader we pass in
GL_VERTEX_SHADER .

Next we attach the shader source code to the shader object and compile the
shader:

```cpp
glShaderSource(vertexShader, 1, &vertexShaderSource, NULL);
glCompileShader(vertexShader);
```

* The glShaderSource function takes the shader object to compile to as its
first argument. The second argument specifies how many strings we're passing as
source code, which is only one. The third parameter is the actual source code
of the vertex shader and we can leave the 4th parameter to NULL.

* You probably want to check if compilation was successful after the call to
glCompileShader and if not, what errors were found so you can fix those.
Checking for compile-time errors is accomplished as follows:

```cpp
int  success;
char infoLog[512];
glGetShaderiv(vertexShader, GL_COMPILE_STATUS, &success);

if(!success) {
    glGetShaderInfoLog(vertexShader, 512, NULL, infoLog);
    std::cout << "ERROR::SHADER::VERTEX::COMPILATION_FAILED\n" << infoLog << std::endl;
}
```


## Fragment Shader

* The fragment shader is the second and final shader we're going to
create for rendering a triangle. The fragment shader is all about
calculating the color output of your pixels. To keep things simple the
fragment shader will always output an orange-ish color

```glsl
#version 330 core
out vec4 FragColor;

void main() {
    FragColor = vec4(1.0f, 1.0f, 0.0f, 1.0f);
}
```

* The process for compiling a fragment shader is similar to the vertex
shader, although this time we use the GL_FRAGMENT_SHADER constant as
the shader type:

```cpp
unsigned int fragmentShader;
fragmentShader = glCreateShader(GL_FRAGMENT_SHADER);
glShaderSource(fragmentShader, 1, &fragmentShaderSource, NULL);
glCompileShader(fragmentShader);

`````
* Both the shaders are now compiled and the only thing left to do is
link both shader objects into a shader program that we can use for
rendering. Make sure to check for compile errors here as well!

## Shader Program

* A shader program object is the final linked version of multiple
shaders combined. To use the recently compiled shaders we have to link
them to a shader program object and then activate this shader program
when rendering objects. The activated shader program's shaders will be
used when we issue render calls.

* When linking the shaders into a program it links the outputs of each
shader to the inputs of the next shader. This is also where you'll get
linking errors if your outputs and inputs do not match.

```cpp
unsigned int shaderProgram;
shaderProgram = glCreateProgram();

```
* The glCreateProgram function creates a program and returns the ID
reference to the newly created program object. Now we need to attach
the previously compiled shaders to the program object and then link
them with glLinkProgram:

```cpp
glAttachShader(shaderProgram, vertexShader);
glAttachShader(shaderProgram, fragmentShader);
glLinkProgram(shaderProgram);

glGetProgramiv(shaderProgram, GL_LINK_STATUS, &success);
if(!success) {
    glGetProgramInfoLog(shaderProgram, 512, NULL, infoLog);
    ...
}
```
* The result is a program object that we can activate by calling
glUseProgram with the newly created program object as its argument

```cpp
glUseProgram(shaderProgram);
```

* Every shader and rendering call after glUseProgram will now use this
program object (and thus the shaders).

* Oh yeah, and don't forget to delete the shader objects once we've
linked them into the program object; we no longer need them anymore

```cpp
glDeleteShader(vertexShader);
glDeleteShader(fragmentShader);
```

* Right now we sent the input vertex data to the GPU and instructed the GPU how
it should process the vertex data within a vertex and fragment shader. We're
almost there, but not quite yet. OpenGL does not yet know how it should
interpret the vertex data in memory and how it should connect the vertex data
to the vertex shader's attributes. We'll be nice and tell OpenGL how to do
that.

## Linking Vertex Attributes

* The vertex shader allows us to specify any input we want in the form of
vertex attributes and while this allows for great flexibility, it does mean we
have to manually specify what part of our input data goes to which vertex
attribute in the vertex shader. This means we have to specify how OpenGL should
interpret the vertex data before rendering.

* The position data is stored as 32-bit (4 byte) floating point values.
* Each position is composed of 3 of those values.
* There is no space (or other values) between each set of 3 values. The values
are tightly packed in the array.
* The first value in the data is at the beginning of the buffer.
* With this knowledge we can tell OpenGL how it should interpret the vertex
data (per vertex attribute) using glVertexAttribPointer :

```cpp
glVertexAttribPointer(0, 3, GL_FLOAT, GL_FALSE, 3 * sizeof(float), (void*)0);
glEnableVertexAttribArray(0);  
```

* The first parameter specifies which vertex attribute we want to configure.
Remember that we specified the location of the position vertex attribute in the
vertex shader with layout (location = 0) . This sets the location of the vertex
attribute to 0 and since we want to pass data to this vertex attribute, we pass
in 0.

* The next argument specifies the size of the vertex attribute. The vertex
attribute is a vec3 so it is composed of 3 values.

* The third argument specifies the type of the data which is GL_FLOAT (a vec*
in GLSL consists of floating point values).

* The next argument specifies if we want the data to be normalized. If we're
inputting integer data types (int, byte) and we've set this to GL_TRUE , the
integer data is normalized to 0 (or -1 for signed data) and 1 when converted to
float. This is not relevant for us so we'll leave this at GL_FALSE .

* The fifth argument is known as the stride and tells us the space between
consecutive vertex attributes. Since the next set of position data is located
exactly 3 times the size of a float away we specify that value as the stride.
Note that since we know that the array is tightly packed (there is no space
between the next vertex attribute value) we could've also specified the stride
as 0 to let OpenGL determine the stride (this only works when values are
tightly packed). Whenever we have more vertex attributes we have to carefully
define the spacing between each vertex attribute but we'll get to see more
examples of that later on.

* The last parameter is of type void* and thus requires that weird cast. This
is the offset of where the position data begins in the buffer. Since the
position data is at the start of the data array this value is just 0 . We will
explore this parameter in more detail later on;Now that we specified how OpenGL
should interpret the vertex data we should also enable the vertex attribute
with glEnableVertexAttribArray giving the vertex attribute location as its
argument; vertex attributes are disabled by default. From that point on we have
everything set up: we initialized the vertex data in a buffer using a vertex
buffer object, set up a vertex and fragment shader and told OpenGL how to link
the vertex data to the vertex shader's vertex attributes. Drawing an object in
OpenGL would now look something like this:

```cpp
// 0. copy our vertices array in a buffer for OpenGL to use
glBindBuffer(GL_ARRAY_BUFFER, VBO);
glBufferData(GL_ARRAY_BUFFER, sizeof(vertices), vertices, GL_STATIC_DRAW);
// 1. then set the vertex attributes pointers
glVertexAttribPointer(0, 3, GL_FLOAT, GL_FALSE, 3 * sizeof(float), (void*)0);
glEnableVertexAttribArray(0);  
// 2. use our shader program when we want to render an object
glUseProgram(shaderProgram);
// 3. now draw the object 
someOpenGLFunctionThatDrawsOurTriangle();
```

* We have to repeat this process every time we want to draw an object. It may
not look like that much, but imagine if we have over 5 vertex attributes and
perhaps 100s of different objects (which is not uncommon). Binding the
appropriate buffer objects and configuring all vertex attributes for each of
those objects quickly becomes a cumbersome process. What if there was some way
we could store all these state configurations into an object and simply bind
this object to restore its state?

## Vertex Array Object

* A vertex array object (also known as VAO ) can be bound just like a vertex
buffer object and any subsequent vertex attribute calls from that point on will
be stored inside the VAO. This has the advantage that when configuring vertex
attribute pointers you only have to make those calls once and whenever we want
to draw the object, we can just bind the corresponding VAO. This makes
switching between different vertex data and attribute configurations as easy as
binding a different VAO. All the state we just set is stored inside the VAO.

* Core OpenGL requires that we use a VAO so it knows what to do with our vertex
inputs. If we fail to bind a VAO, OpenGL will most likely refuse to draw
anything.

* A vertex array object stores the following:
* Calls to glEnableVertexAttribArray or glDisableVertexAttribArray.
* Vertex attribute configurations via glVertexAttribPointer.
* Vertex buffer objects associated with vertex attributes by calls to
glVertexAttribPointer.
* The process to generate a VAO looks similar to that of a VBO:

```cpp
unsigned int VAO{};
glGenVertexArrays(1, &VAO);

```
* To use a VAO all you have to do is bind the VAO using glBindVertexArray.
* From that point on we should bind/configure the corresponding VBO(s) and
attribute pointer(s) and then unbind the VAO for later use. As soon as we want
to draw an object, we simply bind the VAO with the preferred settings before
drawing the object and that is it. In code this would look a bit like this:

```cpp
// ..:: Initialization code (done once (unless your object frequently changes)) :: ..
// 1. bind Vertex Array Object
glBindVertexArray(VAO);
// 2. copy our vertices array in a buffer for OpenGL to use
glBindBuffer(GL_ARRAY_BUFFER, VBO);
glBufferData(GL_ARRAY_BUFFER, sizeof(vertices), vertices, GL_STATIC_DRAW);
// 3. then set our vertex attributes pointers
glVertexAttribPointer(0, 3, GL_FLOAT, GL_FALSE, 3 * sizeof(float), (void*)0);
glEnableVertexAttribArray(0);

[...]

// ..:: Drawing code (in render loop) :: ..
// 4. draw the object
glUseProgram(shaderProgram);
glBindVertexArray(VAO);
someOpenGLFunctionThatDrawsOurTriangle();

```

* And that is it! Everything we did the last few million pages led up to this
moment, a VAO that stores our vertex attribute configuration and which VBO to
use. Usually when you have multiple objects you want to draw, you first
generate/configure all the VAOs (and thus the required VBO and attribute
pointers) and store those for later use. The moment we want to draw one of our
objects, we take the corresponding VAO, bind it, then draw the object and
unbind the VAO again.

## The triangle we've all been waiting for

* To draw our objects of choice, OpenGL provides us with the glDrawArrays
function that draws primitives using the currently active shader, the
previously defined vertex attribute configuration and with the VBO's vertex
data (indirectly bound via the VAO).

```cpp
glUseProgram(shaderProgram);
glBindVertexArray(VAO);
glDrawArrays(GL_TRIANGLES, 0, 3);
```

* The glDrawArrays function takes as its first argument the OpenGL primitive type
we would like to draw. Since I said at the start we wanted to draw a triangle,
and I don't like lying to you, we pass in GL_TRIANGLES . The second argument
specifies the starting index of the vertex array we'd like to draw; we just
leave this at 0 . The last argument specifies how many vertices we want to
draw, which is 3 (we only render 1 triangle from our data, which is exactly 3
vertices long).

## Element Buffer Object

* There is one last thing we'd like to discuss when rendering vertices
and that is element buffer objects abbreviated to EBO. To explain how
element buffer objects work it's best to give an example: suppose we
want to draw a rectangle instead of a triangle. We can draw a
rectangle using two triangles (OpenGL mainly works with triangles).
This will generate the following set of vertices:

```cpp
const float vertices[] = {
    // first triangle
     0.5f,  0.5f, 0.0f,  // top right
     0.5f, -0.5f, 0.0f,  // bottom right
    -0.5f,  0.5f, 0.0f,  // top left
    // second triangle
     0.5f, -0.5f, 0.0f,  // bottom right
    -0.5f, -0.5f, 0.0f,  // bottom left
    -0.5f,  0.5f, 0.0f   // top left
};
```

* As you can see, there is some overlap on the vertices specified. We specify
bottom right and top left twice! This is an overhead of 50% since the same
rectangle could also be specified with only 4 vertices, instead of 6. This will
only get worse as soon as we have more complex models that have over 1000s of
triangles where there will be large chunks that overlap. What would be a better
solution is to store only the unique vertices and then specify the order at
which we want to draw these vertices in. In that case we would only have to
store 4 vertices for the rectangle, and then just specify at which order we'd
like to draw them. Wouldn't it be great if OpenGL provided us with a feature
like that?

* You can see that, when using indices, we only need 4 vertices instead of 6.
Next we need to create the element buffer object:

```cpp
unsigned int EBO;
glGenBuffers(1, &EBO);
```

* Similar to the VBO we bind the EBO and copy the indices into the buffer with
glBufferData . Also, just like the VBO we want to place those calls between a
bind and an unbind call, although this time we specify GL_ELEMENT_ARRAY_BUFFER
as the buffer type.

```cpp
glBindBuffer(GL_ELEMENT_ARRAY_BUFFER, EBO);
glBufferData(GL_ELEMENT_ARRAY_BUFFER, sizeof(indices), indices, GL_STATIC_DRAW);
```

* Note that we're now giving GL_ELEMENT_ARRAY_BUFFER as the buffer target. The
last thing left to do is replace the glDrawArrays call with glDrawElements to
indicate we want to render the triangles from an index buffer. When using
glDrawElements we're going to draw using indices provided in the element buffer
object currently bound:

```cpp
glBindBuffer(GL_ELEMENT_ARRAY_BUFFER, EBO);
glDrawElements(GL_TRIANGLES, 6, GL_UNSIGNED_INT, 0);

```

* The first argument specifies the mode we want to draw in, similar to
glDrawArrays . The second argument is the count or number of elements we'd like
to draw. We specified 6 indices so we want to draw 6 vertices in total. The
third argument is the type of the indices which is of type GL_UNSIGNED_INT .
The last argument allows us to specify an offset in the EBO (or pass in an
index array, but that is when you're not using element buffer objects), but
we're just going to leave this at 0.

The glDrawElements function takes its indices from the EBO currently bound to
the GL_ELEMENT_ARRAY_BUFFER target. This means we have to bind the
corresponding EBO each time we want to render an object with indices which
again is a bit cumbersome. It just so happens that a vertex array object also
keeps track of element buffer object bindings. The last element buffer object
that gets bound while a VAO is bound, is stored as the VAO's element buffer
object. Binding to a VAO then also automatically binds that EBO.

* _A VAO stores the glBindBuffer calls when the target is
GL_ELEMENT_ARRAY_BUFFER. This also means it stores its unbind calls so make
sure you don't unbind the element array buffer before unbinding your VAO,
otherwise it doesn't have an EBO configured_

```cpp
// ..:: Initialization code :: ..
// 1. bind Vertex Array Object
glBindVertexArray(VAO);
// 2. copy our vertices array in a vertex buffer for OpenGL to use
glBindBuffer(GL_ARRAY_BUFFER, VBO);
glBufferData(GL_ARRAY_BUFFER, sizeof(vertices), vertices, GL_STATIC_DRAW);
// 3. copy our index array in a element buffer for OpenGL to use
glBindBuffer(GL_ELEMENT_ARRAY_BUFFER, EBO);
glBufferData(GL_ELEMENT_ARRAY_BUFFER, sizeof(indices), indices, GL_STATIC_DRAW);
// 4. then set the vertex attributes pointers
glVertexAttribPointer(0, 3, GL_FLOAT, GL_FALSE, 3 * sizeof(float), (void*)0);
glEnableVertexAttribArray(0);  

[...]
  
// ..:: Drawing code (in render loop) :: ..
glUseProgram(shaderProgram);
glBindVertexArray(VAO);
glDrawElements(GL_TRIANGLES, 6, GL_UNSIGNED_INT, 0);
glBindVertexArray(0);
```

### Wireframe mode
* To draw your triangles in wireframe mode, you can configure how OpenGL draws
its primitives via glPolygonMode(GL_FRONT_AND_BACK, GL_LINE). The first
argument says we want to apply it to the front and back of all triangles and
the second line tells us to draw them as lines. Any subsequent drawing calls
will render the triangles in wireframe mode until we set it back to its default
using glPolygonMode(GL_FRONT_AND_BACK, GL_FILL).
