# Notes for today

## Textures

* We learned that to add more detail to our objects we can use colors for each
vertex to create some interesting images. However, to get a fair bit of realism
we'd have to have many vertices so we could specify a lot of colors. This takes
up a considerable amount of extra overhead, since each model needs a lot more
vertices and for each vertex a color attribute as well. What artists and
programmers generally prefer is to use a texture

* A texture is a 2D image (even 1D and 3D textures exist) used to add detail to
an object; think of a texture as a piece of paper with a nice brick image (for
example) on it neatly folded over your 3D house so it looks like your house has
a stone exterior. Because we can insert a lot of detail in a single image, we
can give the illusion the object is extremely detailed without having to
specify extra vertices.

* In order to map a texture to the triangle we need to tell each vertex of the
triangle which part of the texture it corresponds to. Each vertex should thus
have a texture coordinate associated with them that specifies what part of the
texture image to sample from. Fragment interpolation then does the rest for the
other fragments.

* Texture coordinates range from 0 to 1 in the x and y axis (remember that we use
2D texture images). Retrieving the texture color using texture coordinates is
called sampling . Texture coordinates start at (0,0) for the lower left corner
of a texture image to (1,1) for the upper right corner of a texture image. The
following image shows how we map texture coordinates to the triangle:

* GL_REPEAT : The default behavior for textures. Repeats the texture image.
* GL_MIRRORED_REPEAT : Same as GL_REPEAT but mirrors the image with each
repeat.
* GL_CLAMP_TO_EDGE : Clamps the coordinates between 0 and 1 . The result is
that higher coordinates become clamped to the edge, resulting in a stretched
edge pattern.
* GL_CLAMP_TO_BORDER : Coordinates outside the range are now given a
user-specified border color.

```cpp
glTexParameteri(GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_WRAP_S, GL_MIRRORED_REPEAT);
glTexParameteri(GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_WRAP_T, GL_MIRRORED_REPEAT);

float borderColor[] = { 1.0f, 1.0f, 0.0f, 1.0f };
glTexParameterfv(GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_BORDER_COLOR, borderColor);
```

GL_NEAREST results in blocked patterns where we can clearly see the pixels that
form the texture while GL_LINEAR produces a smoother pattern where the
individual pixels are less visible. GL_LINEAR produces a more realistic output,
but some developers prefer a more 8-bit look and as a result pick the
GL_NEAREST option.

Texture filtering can be set for magnifying and minifying operations (when
scaling up or downwards) so you could for example use nearest neighbor
filtering when textures are scaled downwards and linear filtering for upscaled
textures. We thus have to specify the filtering method for both options via
glTexParameter* . The code should look similar to setting the wrapping method:

```cpp
glTexParameteri(GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_MIN_FILTER, GL_NEAREST);
glTexParameteri(GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_MAG_FILTER, GL_LINEAR);
```

## Mipmaps

To solve this issue OpenGL uses a concept called mipmaps that is basically a
collection of texture images where each subsequent texture is twice as small
compared to the previous one. The idea behind mipmaps should be easy to
understand: after a certain distance threshold from the viewer, OpenGL will use
a different mipmap texture that best suits the distance to the object. Because
the object is far away, the smaller resolution will not be noticeable to the
user. OpenGL is then able to sample the correct texels, and there's less cache
memory involved when sampling that part of the mipmaps. Let's take a closer
look at what a mipmapped texture looks like:

Creating a collection of mipmapped textures for each texture image is
cumbersome to do manually, but luckily OpenGL is able to do all the work for us
with a single call to glGenerateMipmap after we've created a texture.

When switching between mipmaps levels during rendering OpenGL may show some
artifacts like sharp edges visible between the two mipmap layers. Just like
normal texture filtering, it is also possible to filter between mipmap levels
using NEAREST and LINEAR filtering for switching between mipmap levels. To
specify the filtering method between mipmap levels we can replace the original
filtering methods with one of the following four options:

GL_NEAREST_MIPMAP_NEAREST : takes the nearest mipmap to match the pixel size
and uses nearest neighbor interpolation for texture sampling.
GL_LINEAR_MIPMAP_NEAREST : takes the nearest mipmap level and samples that
level using linear interpolation.
GL_NEAREST_MIPMAP_LINEAR : linearly interpolates between the two mipmaps that
most closely match the size of a pixel and samples the interpolated level via
nearest neighbor interpolation.
GL_LINEAR_MIPMAP_LINEAR : linearly interpolates between the two closest mipmaps
and samples the interpolated level via linear interpolation.

```cpp
glTexParameteri(GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_MIN_FILTER, GL_LINEAR_MIPMAP_LINEAR);
glTexParameteri(GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_MAG_FILTER, GL_LINEAR);
```

## Generating a texture

```cpp
int width, height, nrChannels;
unsigned char *data = stbi_load("container.jpg", &width, &height, &nrChannels, 0); 

if (data == nullptr) {
    cout << "ERROR";
    return;
}
```

The function first takes as input the location of an image file. It then
expects you to give three ints as its second, third and fourth argument
that stb_image.h will fill with the resulting image's width , height and
number of color channels. We need the image's width and height for
generating textures later on.

* Like any of the previous objects in OpenGL, textures are referenced
with an ID; let's create one:

```cpp
unsigned int texture;
glGenTextures(1, &texture);
```

* The glGenTextures function first takes as input how many textures we want to
generate and stores them in a unsigned int array given as its second argument
(in our case just a single unsigned int ). Just like other objects we need to
bind it so any subsequent texture commands will configure the currently bound
texture:

```cpp
glBindTexture(GL_TEXTURE_2D, texture);
```

* Now that the texture is bound, we can start generating a texture using the
previously loaded image data. Textures are generated with glTexImage2D:

```cpp
glTexImage2D(GL_TEXTURE_2D, 0, GL_RGB, width, height, 0, GL_RGB, GL_UNSIGNED_BYTE, data);
glGenerateMipmap(GL_TEXTURE_2D);


```

* The first argument specifies the texture target; setting this to
GL_TEXTURE_2D means this operation will generate a texture on the currently
bound texture object at the same target (so any textures bound to targets
GL_TEXTURE_1D or GL_TEXTURE_3D will not be affected).
* The second argument specifies the mipmap level for which we want to create a
texture for if you want to set each mipmap level manually, but we'll leave it
at the base level which is 0 .
* The third argument tells OpenGL in what kind of format we want to store the
texture. Our image has only RGB values so we'll store the texture with RGB
values as well.
* The 4th and 5th argument sets the width and height of the resulting texture.
We stored those earlier when loading the image so we'll use the corresponding
variables.
* The next argument should always be 0 (some legacy stuff).
* The 7th and 8th argument specify the format and datatype of the source image.
We loaded the image with RGB values and stored them as char s (bytes) so we'll
pass in the corresponding values.
* The last argument is the actual image data.
* Once glTexImage2D is called, the currently bound texture object now has the
texture image attached to it. However, currently it only has the base-level of
the texture image loaded and if we want to use mipmaps we have to specify all
the different images manually (by continually incrementing the second argument)
or, we could call glGenerateMipmap after generating the texture. This will
automatically generate all the required mipmaps for the currently bound
texture.

```cpp
stbi_image_free(data);
```

### The entire process of using textures look like

```cpp
unsigned int texture;
glGenTextures(1, &texture);
glBindTexture(GL_TEXTURE_2D, texture);
// set the texture wrapping/filtering options (on the currently bound texture object)
glTexParameteri(GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_WRAP_S, GL_REPEAT);
glTexParameteri(GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_WRAP_T, GL_REPEAT);
glTexParameteri(GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_MIN_FILTER, GL_LINEAR_MIPMAP_LINEAR);
glTexParameteri(GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_MAG_FILTER, GL_LINEAR);
// load and generate the texture
int width, height, nrChannels;
unsigned char *data = stbi_load("container.jpg", &width, &height, &nrChannels, 0);
if (data)
{
    glTexImage2D(GL_TEXTURE_2D, 0, GL_RGB, width, height, 0, GL_RGB, GL_UNSIGNED_BYTE, data);
    glGenerateMipmap(GL_TEXTURE_2D);
}
else
{
    std::cout << "Failed to load texture" << std::endl;
}
stbi_image_free(data);

```
